AI overviews inclusion impact in your
organic search traffic we have seen many
different studies analysis research
across different Industries markets
which can certainly serve as a good
reference of where things are going
realistically though this can defer so
much per website right because it's not
only the share of traffic that your
website brings from the type of queries
that are being impacted that at this
point Point have be much more
informational queries but also the
search Behavior with this queries if
there are many more Impressions now or
search popularity for these queries if
you are included or not within the AI
overviews and the visibility of the
inclusion and if there is a link within
the inclusion or not so of course the
impact can differ a lot so I wanted to
share with you a little bit of a process
that I follow tools and functionality
that I have found myself to be very very
helpful to do this assessment what I
have found to be critical due to the
volatility of the AI overviews is to
identify those queries for which AI
overviews have been consistently
included within the time range that you
want to do the assessment and have also
the traffic and visibility metrics for
this same queries for a period of time
in which AI overviews hadn't been
included right to be able to compare
Apple to to Apples what I tend to do is
this you can use asre for example for
this go to your domain organic keywords
look for the market that you want to do
the analysis for you select the AI
overviews from The Sur features and then
you can obtain those queries for which
the target the website ranks and doesn't
rank so for example here I want to
obtain the queries for which the website
ranks within the AI overviews and I
select this filter and then you select
here the period of time I select in the
last month to have a very specific
period of time to compare and in this
case I have only a couple of keywords so
I don't have necessarily enough data to
do the analysis with and hopefully it is
like this in your case your website
hasn't been necessarily impacted that
much with the inclusion of AI overviews
you should export and you can double
check them in the Google sheet that you
obtain seeing that you only leave this
for example two keywords here for which
AI overviews are being shown right now
and consistently in this period of time
and then what I do is a comparison
import those key wordss in an SEO test
using SEO testing.com that integrates
with my Google search conso data by the
way there is a completely spontaneous
Shir out to these tools I only do it
because it's what I use myself to do
this analysis because it highly
facilitates that of course you can do
this comparison directly using the
filtering and the goog search cons or
using similar tools and and I used the
group testing of SEO testing to be able
to see the before and after okay so in
this last month I know that for this
group of queries AI overviews has been
shown in the serbs and I am being featur
in them let's take a look at the
performance right now and compare it
with the performance I had a year ago
for example that I know that this
queries hadn't been included and Ai
overviews and you can also take a double
look in case you're completely sure
these queries were not showing AI
overviews at that point yet in time and
you can create a group test to compare
the two date ranges and then you can do
the same for those queries for which AI
overviews are being included but your
website is not being shown so let's not
only assess the impact of the AI
overviews whenever you're included but
let's assess what happens when AI
overviews are included but you are not
Showcase in them right so exact same
process export the keywords import them
in SEO testing and do a group test with
a similar previous period of time for
which you can confirm AI overviews
hadn't been shown this analysis that I
have done for two different type of
websit so for example for assas website
we can see here what happens when I
overviews is displayed with the site
included in them and also ranking serps
of course in the top positions so we can
see how this is what AI overviews this
is
without Ai overviews and even if the
website is included and ranked the
clicks impact has been negative for them
what I really like about doing it like
this is that we can also take a look at
the other metrics rather easily right so
Impressions per day so I know that I am
comparing the same queries and I can see
that there has been a negative minus
2.77% change in Impressions per day
however we can see that the negative
impact in clicks is definitely much
higher so there's certainly much more
here for the negative impact in clicks
that just that slight negative shift in
Impressions then we should do the same
with AI overview displayed with side not
included in them but still ranked in
serbs what is the impact that AI
overviews has here and in this case we
can see that there is a slight worse
negative impact in clicks minus 75. 64%
here we can see the drop here in clicks
despite a slight Improvement in this
case in the impressions for these
queries I am comparing here year-
over-ear and there has been a slight
Improvement impression as we can see and
despite that yes there has been slightly
worse drop in in colleages on the other
hand I have done this analysis with
different type of website completely so
a retel side in this case and in this
case we can see that with the AI
overview displayed with the side
included in them there was a drop of
minus
47.75 per. and when the AI overview is
displayed with a site not included and
rank in CS the drop has been minus 34%
so it's not even as bad as when the site
is displayed and of course if you don't
take into account all the metrics you
will say h so my conclusion is that it
is worse to be displayed in I overview
than not but no wait wait for a minute
here we can see that in this case
Impressions have also dropped year over
year minus 23% but in this other case
there has been a very big increase in
impressions of 93 67% so of course if
the Impressions increase so much very
likely the drop in clicks here when the
AI overviews are included on the side is
not shown in there will be much much
worse right so again is important I
believe to do the comparison the
assessment of the AI overviews much more
segmented what happens when my website
is included what happened when it is not
what has been the change in the search
behavior for these queries and what is
the drop that we can actually attribute
to the AI overviews inclusion and as we
can see it can be very very different
for different reasons based on the
specific conditions and context of each
website so it's very very important to
go and take a look and validate yourself
following a process that takes all of
this into account ideally in the future
this is not necessary because we get an
AI overviews filter in the Google search
console crossing fingers and another
request I know that they have been money
in our industry lately to the Google
team for this it will be very very
important to have this type of filtering
directly in the Google search console to
avoid all of this additional hazle to
have a much better view better
understand what is going on and to be
able to communicate it with clients to
decision makers and allocate resources
and efforts accordingly until the next
video and remember to subscribe to the
SEO newsletter to avoid missing out of
the latest in SEO